# Abstract

<center>Defining the Functional Redundancy in the Rap1 GTPase Binding RA Domains of Canoe/Afadin in normal embryonic development</center>

Bismark Acheampong<sup>1</sup>, Noah J. Gurley2, Emily D. McParland2, Corbin Jensen2, Mark Peifer2,3.

Department of Theoretical and Applied Biology, KNUST, GHANA1, Department of Biology2, , Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center3, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA

The concept of embryogenesis requires cells to change shape and move while maintaining tissue integrity. This necessitates a robust force-generating linkage between the actomyosin cytoskeleton and the cell-cell adherens junctions (AJs). We focus on Drosophila Canoe, a cytoplasmic multidomain scaffolding protein, whose orthologue is mammalian Afadin. We seek to define its baseline mechanism of action in ensuring embryonic viability and morphogenesis. Canoe is activated when the small GTPase Rap1 binds to its two Ras-association (RA) domains. Previous work revealed the critical importance of the RA domains Canoe function in AJ-cytoskeletal linkage and thus morphogenesis.  The RA domains are also important for Canoe recruitment to AJs under tension. We presently ask why there are two Rap1 binding RA domains.  We hypothesized that they might be functionally redundant. We used our CRISPR Cas9 engineered canoe locus to make mutants lacking either RA1 or RA2.  However, we found that RA1 is very important for Canoe function while RA2 is less critical.  We know that Canoe and Afadin can dimerize for functionality. We thus wondered if proteins could complement one another for function if both were expressed in the same embryo.  We thus made allelic combinations in which the two proteins together have only a single copy of RA2, two copies of RA2, one copy of RA1, or one RA1 and one RA2 on different Canoe proteins.  We then examined adult and embryonic viability, and examined defects in morphogenesis by examining the embryonic cuticle or through immunostaining and confocal microscopy. Interestingly, with respect of adult viability, neither a single RA2 domain nor two RA2 domains were sufficient.  A single RA1 domain was barely sufficient, while a combination of one RA1 domain on one protein and one RA2 domain on the other protein was sufficient.  We next used a sensitized assay to examine protein function that allowed us to detect any residual function during embryogenesis.  These data suggest that proteins lacking RA1 or with two copies of RA2 are severely deficient but retain a small amount of function.  Together, these data provide new insights into how Rap1 activates Canoe and modulates its important function. 
 
